>> Reporter: IN THE BORDER TOWN
OF SAN ANTONIO DE TAÁCHIRA,
VENEZUELANS FED UP WITH THEIR
HARDSHIPS ARE FLEEING THEIR
COUNTRY EVERY DAY, BY FOOT, FOR
COLOMBIA.
THEY EXIT CARS AND BUSES
SUITCASES IN HAND, AND WALK
TOWARD THE SIMOÓN BOÓLIVAR
INTERNATIONAL BRIDGE AND CROSS
INTO THE TOWN OF CUÚCUTA.
SOME ARE HEADING OFF INTO THE
UNCERTAIN WORLD OF THOSE WHO
EMIGRATE WITHOUT A WORK VISA.
VENEZUELAN LUISA GOMEZ ARRIVED
TWO MONTHS AGO.
A SINGLE MOTHER, SHE TRIES TO
SUPPORT HER FIVE CHILDREN,
GRANDCHILD, AND MOTHER BY
SELLING TOOTHBRUSHES AND
TOOTHPASTE ON PUBLIC BUSES.
>> (translated): IT'S
DIFFICULT, THERE'S SOME DRIVERS
WHO DON'T LET YOU WORK, BECAUSE
SO MANY VENEZUELANS HAVE
ARRIVED, THERE'S A LOT OF
VENDORS.
>> Reporter: GOMEZ IS ON THE
MOVE FROM DAWN TILL DUSK SEVEN
DAYS A WEEK.
AFTER TIPPING DRIVERS WHO LET
HER ON, GOMEZ NETTED TWO DOLLARS
YESTERDAY.
TODAY SHE WENT HOME WITH $13--
BARELY ENOUGH TO FEED HER KIDS.
>> (translated): WHEN I ENTER
THIS DOOR, THE FIRST THING THEY
ASK ME IS, "MAMA, WHAT DID YOU
BRING ME?" AND IT'S SAD TO
ARRIVE AT HOME WITHOUT ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: HOME FOR NOW IS A
BARE BONES HOUSE THAT A LOCAL
CHURCH MEMBER HAS LET HER LIVE
IN RENT-FREE UNTIL NOVEMBER.
SHE'S ALREADY BEHIND ON UTILITY
BILLS.
>> (translated): IF I DON'T
EVEN HAVE $35 TO PAY FOR THE
GAS, HOW AM I GOING TO PAY FOR
RENT?
I DON'T KNOW WHAT I'M GOING TO
DO.
THIS IS DISTRESSING.
>> Reporter: GOMEZ HOPES SHE CAN
GET A WORK PERMIT AND HER KIDS
COULD BE ELIGIBLE FOR SCHOOLS
HERE-- WHATEVER SHE CAN DO TO
AVOID GOING BACK TO VENEZUELA.
>> (translated): IF GOD
PERMITS THAT THINGS GET SETTLED,
I'LL STAY HERE IN COLOMBIA,
TRYING TO RAISE MY KIDS.
IT'S DIFFICULT TO START WITH
ZERO AND SLEEPING ON A MATTRESS
ON THE FLOOR.
>> Reporter: WITH COLOMBIA'S 50-
YEAR CIVIL WAR HAVING REACHED A
TRUCE LAST YEAR, MANY
VENEZUELANS SEE COLOMBIA AS A
SAFER BET THAN STAYING PUT.
FOR DECADES, COLOMBIANS FLEEING
THE ARMED CONFLICT CROSSED THIS
BRIDGE IN DROVES INTO
NEIGHBORING VENEZUELA TO SEEK
REFUGE.
BUT NOW THE TRAFFIC IS GOING THE
OTHER WAY.
EVERY DAY, TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
VENEZUELANS WALK THIS BRIDGE TO
CROSS INTO COLOMBIA-- TO SEEK
MEDICAL ATTENTION, BUYING BASIC
GOODS, LIKE FLOUR AND TOILET
PAPER, OR TO MOVE THEIR ENTIRE
LIVES ACROSS THE BRIDGE AND TRY
TO START NEW ONES IN COLOMBIA.
ON THE COLOMBIAN SIDE OF THE
BRIDGE, VENDORS AND SMALL SHOPS
HAVE POPPED UP NEXT TO MONEY-
CHANGERS, WHERE VENEZUELANS
EXCHANGE WAGES PAID IN THEIR
DEVALUED CURRENCY-- A WEEK'S
WORTH OF WAGES GETS THEM A FEW
BAGS OF CORNMEAL, RICE AND BARS
OF SOAP.
A FEW MINUTES' WALK FROM THE
BRIDGE, THERE'S A LINE DOWN THE
BLOCK FOR A SOUP KITCHEN RUN BY
A LOCAL CHURCH.
IT OPENED IN MARCH TO RESPOND TO
THE INFLUX OF HUNGRY
VENEZUELANS.
IT SERVES 500 TO 800 LUNCHES A
DAY.
SOME STAY INDEFINITELY.
OTHERS, LIKE THIS WOMAN, GO HOME
TO VENEZUELA AFTER SPENDING THE
DAY CARTING MIGRANTS' BELONGINGS
ACROSS THE BRIDGE FOR CASH.
>> (TRANSLATED): CARRYING
SUITCASES WITH MY KID AND
WHAT I MAKE WITH THAT IS FOR
FOOD FOR THE HOUSE.
>> Reporter: COLOMBIA HAS BECOME
A LIFELINE FOR VENEZUELANS, NOT
ONLY FOR FOOD AND SUPPLIES, BUT
ALSO MEDICAL SERVICES CURRENTLY
UNAVAILABLE OR UNAFFORDABLE IN
VENEZUELA.
VENEZUELANS HAVE DISCOVERED ONE
WAY TO ACCESS COLOMBIA'S HEALTH
CARE SYSTEM IS THROUGH
HOSPITAL EMERGENCY ROOMS.
AT THE MAIN HOSPITAL IN CUCUTA,
DR. ANDRES GALVIS SAYS E.R.
ADMISSIONS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
HAVE JUMPED 50% IN THE PAST
YEAR.
>> THEY ARE PATIENTS WHO HAVE
NO, NO, NO RESOURCES, NONE.
THEY ARRIVE HERE IN REALLY BAD
SHAPE.
CHILDREN WHO OFTEN REQUIRE
DIALYSIS, WITH SEVERELY INFECTED
KIDNEYS.
EVERYONE INJURED BY FIREARMS OR
IN TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS, ALL
CLASSES OF TRAUMA.
>> Reporter: DR. GALVIS SAYS
WITH DIRE HOSPITAL CONDITIONS IN
VENEZUELA, MANY EXPECTING
MOTHERS FLOCK TO COLOMBIA TO
GIVE BIRTH.
HIS MATERNITY WARD TRAFFIC IS UP
100% THIS YEAR.
>> (translated): THE PATIENT
ARRIVES WHEN SHE'S ALREADY IN
LABOR, IN PAIN.
THEY WAIT UNTIL THEY'RE IN
LABOR, THE WATER'S BROKEN, AND
WHOOSH, YOU ATTEND TO THEM.
>> Reporter: JOHANNA SANCHEZ
LEFT VENEZUELA WHEN SHE WAS
FOUR MONTHS PREGNANT.
>> (translated): WITH THE
SITUATION THERE, I COULDN'T
RETURN.
I HAD A BABY LAST YEAR, AND IT
DIED ON ME.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS HER LAST
BIRTH HAD COMPLICATIONS, AND THE
BABY REQUIRED AN OPERATION.
AFTERWARDS, SHE SAYS, THE
VENEZUELAN HOSPITAL DIDN'T HAVE
A CATHETER THAT WAS THE RIGHT
SIZE.
>> (translated): THEY FOUND A
DIFFERENT ONE, BUT IT WAS
THICKER, TOO THICK FOR THE
BABY'S VEIN.
IT LEAKED, THERE WERE
COMPLICATIONS.
HE LASTED 19 DAYS.
>> Reporter: IN VENEZUELA,
WILLIAM BAYONA SUPPORTS HIS
FAMILY WITH THE LITTLE MONEY HE
MAKES DRIVING KIDS TO SCHOOL IN
HIS VAN.
BUT NOW HE NEEDS CATARACT
SURGERY.
>> (translated): THE DOCTOR
PROHIBITED ME FROM DRIVING, BUT
I CAN'T LET MYSELF STOP, BECAUSE
WHO'S GOING TO SUPPORT MY FAMILY
AND ME?
>> Reporter: BORN IN COLOMBIA,
WILLIAM IS A BIT LUCKIER THAN
MOST VENEZUELANS: HE'S A DUAL
CITIZEN WHO QUALIFIES FOR FREE,
GOVERNMENT-PROVIDED HEALTH CARE
IN COLOMBIA.
HE CROSSED THE BORDER WITH HIS
COUSIN.
>> WE'RE IN COLOMBIA!
>> Reporter: I ASKED HIM WHAT
HIS SITUATION WOULD BE LIKE IF
HE WASN'T A DUAL CITIZEN.
>> ONE COULDN'T EVEN THINK ABOUT
IT WITHOUT A COLOMBIAN ID;
THERE'S NO INSURANCE.
>> Reporter: HE'S COME TO THIS
CLINIC IN CUÚCUTA, BECAUSE
CATARACT SURGERY IN VENEZUELA IS
AVAILABLE ONLY AT PRIVATE
CLINICS HE CAN'T AFFORD.
>> (translated): IT'S TOO
EXPENSIVE.
TO GET THAT KIND OF MONEY, YOU'D
HAVE TO WORK FOR A YEAR.
>> Reporter: WITH LIMITED
COLOMBIAN GOVERNMENT SUPPORT, A
CATHOLIC MISSION IN CUCUTA HAS
COME TO THE AID OF VENEZUELAN
MIGRANTS-- PROVIDING LUNCH
PROGRAMS FOR CHILDREN, WORKSHOPS
FOR MOTHERS TO START MICRO-
ENTERPRISES, AND HELPING
FAMILIES FIND HOMES.
FATHER FRANCESCO BORTIGNON RUNS
IT, AND WANTS COLOMBIAN
AUTHORITIES TO BE MORE
RESPONSIVE TO THE MIGRANTS.
>> (translated): WHAT IS
IMPORTANT FOR US IS THAT THE
STATE OPENS ITS EYES AND SEES
THAT THERE IS ALREADY A
SIGNIFICANT NUMBER OF PEOPLE
WITH VERY SPECIFIC NEEDS, FOR
WHOM THE STATE IS DOING NOTHING,
BECAUSE THE ONLY ONES DOING
ANYTHING ARE US HUMANITARIAN
ORGANIZATIONS.
>> Reporter: WITHOUT LEGAL
STATUS OR WORK PERMITS, MANY
VENEZUELANS GET PUSHED TO THE
MARGINS OF COLOMBIAN SOCIETY.
SOME, LIKE MARIA RIVERA, LIVE IN
NEIGHBORHOODS LIKE THIS ONE,
SQUATTING ON LAND BY A CREEK
FULL OF RAW SEWAGE.
AFTER EMIGRATING, RIVERA LIVED
IN A BETTER HOUSE WITH HER
HUSBAND AND THEIR FIVE-YEAR-OLD
SON.
BUT HER HUSBAND'S SPORADIC WORK
AS A DAY LABORER CAN'T COVER
THEIR RENT AND UTILITIES.
>> (translated): HE'S EARNING
VERY LITTLE NOW, ABOUT $40 A
WEEK, AND WITH THAT WE HAVE TO
PAY THE RENT.
THAT'S WHY I'M MOVING, BECAUSE
THE RENT'S GOT ME UP TO HERE.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE MOVING
HERE, WHERE THERE'S NO RENT,
INTO A ONE-ROOM SHACK WITH A
DIRT FLOOR.
HER HUSBAND BUILT IT WITH
PLASTIC TARPS AND SECOND-HAND
PLANKS OF WOOD.
>> (translated): THIS IS WHERE
THE KITCHEN WILL BE, THERE'LL BE
A LITTLE TABLE AND THE TWO-
BURNER STOVE.
>> Reporter: RIVERA'S NEIGHBORS,
WHO ALSO FLED VENEZUELA'S
HARDSHIPS, ARE STRUGGLING IN
COLOMBIA.
THEIR HUSBANDS ARE OUT LOOKING
FOR WORK.
>> (translated): IF THEY GET
WORK, THEY DON'T PAY THEM AS
THEY SHOULD.
THEY PAY VERY LITTLE.
MY HUSBAND WORKS IN A HARDWARE
STORE, BUT THEY DON'T PAY HIM
THE CORRECT WAGE.
>> (translated): A COLOMBIAN'S
DAY WAGE IS BETWEEN $10 AND $13.
THAT'S THE MINIMUM.
FOR A VENEZUELAN, THEY GIVE $5,
$7 DOLLARS A DAY.
>> Reporter: SOME COLOMBIAN
EMPLOYERS TAKE ADVANTAGE OF
THESE VENEZUELANS LIVING IN THE
SHADOWS.
OTHERS BUSINESSES WON'T HIRE
VENEZUELANS WITHOUT WORK PERMITS
FOR FEAR OF GOVERNMENT FINES.
AS A RESULT, VENEZUELAN MIGRANTS
ARE PUSHED INTO PRECARIOUS JOBS,
SELLING THEIR WARES IN THE
STREETS FOR TINY AMOUNTS OF
CASH.
EVEN CHILDREN ARE PRESSED INTO
SALES.
DEPORTATIONS ARE RARE AND
CUCUTA'S MAYOR SAYS THE INFLUX
OF VENEZUELAN MIGRANTS WILLING
TO WORK FOR LESS IS MAKING IT
HARDER FOR HIS CONSTITUENTS TO
FIND JOBS.
>> ( translated ): I'M WORRIED
ABOUT THE LACK OF WORK
OPPORTUNITIES IN MY CITY.
FOR WHOM?
FOR MY CITIZENS, FOR THOSE WHO
LIVE IN CUÚCUTA.
BUT IF THERE'S AN EXODUS OF
200,000 OR 300,000 VENEZUELANS,
WELL, UNEMPLOYMENT IS GOING TO
RISE IN OUR CITY.
>> Reporter: IN EXPECTATION OF
AN EVEN GREATER INFLUX FROM
VENEZUELA, SHOULD THE
GOVERNMENT OF PRESIDENT NICOLAS
MADURO COLLAPSE, MAYOR ROJAS
SAYS REGIONAL AND NATIONAL
AUTHORITIES ARE MAKING
EMERGENCY PLANS.
>> (translated): WE DON'T KNOW
HOW MANY PEOPLE WE'LL BE ABLE TO
RECEIVE.
WE HAVE ARENAS READY FOR
WHATEVER MOMENT THERE'S AN
AVALANCHE OF VENEZUELANS, IF
THERE'S A COUP D'ETAT, WE'LL BE
ON THE ALERT.
BUT I CAN'T SAY THAT I'M GOING
TO BUILD SHELTERS FOR REFUGEES.
>> Reporter: WITH OR WITHOUT
A WARM WELCOME, THE
VENEZUELANS KEEP COMING.
WITH COLOMBIAN AUTHORITIES
ESTIMATING 100,000 HAVE SETTLED
IN COLOMBIA THIS YEAR.